(Doc+) Flush out Data Tiers (#107981)
elastic/elasticsearch: docs/reference/datatiers.asciidoc

[[data-tiers]]
== Data tiers

A _data tier_ is a collection of <<modules-node,nodes>> within a cluster which share the same 
<<node-roles,data node role>>. Elastic recommends this collection of nodes also shares the same 
hardware profile to avoid <<hotspotting,hot spotting>>. Data tiers' usage generally splits along 
<<data-management,data categories>> for _content_ and _time series_ data. {es} available 

> data tiers:

Author: IMO (said strongly, held loosely) the important flag is excellent as a stand-alone call out; however, I feel including the reason to Elastic's recommendation within its paragraph is in itself helpful/important. 

Secondly and separately, I believe it's important to clarify what "content" and "time series" data is before using those terms within the next sections bullet list, since those are not industry terms but are lower-case proper nouns we introduce.

* <<content-tier,Content tier>> nodes handle the indexing and query load for content 

> indices, such as a <<system-indices,system index>> or a product catalog.

Author: This might be another 😕 point for me then if we can discuss:

1. Lower down on the existing page under [Content header](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/master/data-tiers.html#content-tier) already says "System indices and other indices that aren’t part of a data stream are automatically allocated to the content tier." which is why I didn't realize I might be misunderstanding. 
1. Support encourages users to keep all system indices on hot/content. Does Dev agree?
2. AFAIK (and it's an ongoing discussion / definition-problem) system indices are the indices which report from the snapshot's feature states. So from the [unofficial list I wrote for Support](https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/issues/50251#issuecomment-1107637953) we later learned e.g. `.ilm-history` and `.kibana-event-log` don't qualify as system indices. So e.g. only (A) qualify as system indices and AFAICT that subset doesn't have time series data (at least no indices which'd rollover). 

<details><summary>(A)</summary>

---

```
{
  "feature_states": [
    {
      "feature_name": "security",
      "indices": [".security-tokens-7",".security-7",".security-profile-8"]
    },
    {
      "feature_name": "geoip",
      "indices": [".geoip_databases"]
    },
    {
      "feature_name": "async_search",
      "indices": [".async-search"]
    },
    {
      "feature_name": "machine_learning",
      "indices": [".ml-inference-native-000002",".ml-inference-000005",".ml-config"]
    },
    {
      "feature_name": "transform",
      "indices": [".transform-internal-007"]
    },
    {
      "feature_name": "kibana",
      "indices": [
        ".kibana_analytics_8.12.2_001",
        ".kibana_task_manager_8.12.2_001",
        ".kibana_ingest_8.12.2_001",
        ".apm-custom-link",
        ".apm-agent-configuration",
        ".kibana_8.12.2_001",
        ".kibana_security_session_1",
        ".kibana_security_solution_8.12.2_001",
        ".kibana_alerting_cases_8.12.2_001"
      ]
    },
    {
      "feature_name": "tasks",
      "indices": [".tasks"]
    },
    {
      "feature_name": "fleet",
      "indices": [
        ".fleet-agents-7",
        ".fleet-enrollment-api-keys-7",
        ".fleet-actions-7",
        ".fleet-policies-7",
        ".fleet-servers-7",
        ".fleet-policies-leader-7"
      ]
    }
  ]
}
```

---

</details>

> indices, such as a <<system-indices,system index>> or a product catalog.

Reviewer: > Support encourages users to keep all system indices on hot/content.

Users cannot control these at all. System indices cannot be configured apart from specialized APIs. Generally, we shouldn't be talking about system indices with users (if at all), since they are meant to be used only for system usage.

> indices, such as a <<system-indices,system index>> or a product catalog.

Author: Is that a recent change? Because users sending `.kibana*` or `.reporting*` system indices or or `.alert*` if they count as system indices to warm/cold tier is an ongoing lowkey concern.

> indices, such as a <<system-indices,system index>> or a product catalog.

Reviewer: What is the concern with them moving the indices?

Inspecting the code here, we differentiate between internal and external system indices, and those managed by ES and unmanaged by ES (I stand corrected, sorry about my confusion here). It looks like we do have a concept of a system index that a user could influence somewhat (through setting an appropriate origin).

> indices, such as a <<system-indices,system index>> or a product catalog.

Author: > What is the concern with them moving the indices?

Specifically thinking of the SIEM use-case, moving `.alert*` to cold can cause Rules looking over it to timeout which led towards [kibana#172162](https://github.com/elastic/kibana/pull/172162). 

But overall where we generally think of hot as most performant of hardware to keep Kibana as performant as possible we keep it in hot. Is your understanding that `.kibana*` should be able to be hosted anywhere aside from frozen without causing performance issues?

> indices, such as a <<system-indices,system index>> or a product catalog.

Author: FWIW, I'm grateful for the discussion as this has been very helpful and informative, but for the literal line change requested, I'm convinced now we need to standardize a system index definition before including it as an example, cheers. 

FYI in case you're interested, Support discussion in [support-tech-lead#1351](https://github.com/elastic/support-tech-lead/issues/1351).

and rarely needs to be updated.
* <<cold-tier,Cold tier>> nodes hold time series data that is accessed
infrequently and not normally updated. To save space, you can keep
<<fully-mounted,fully mounted indices>> of
<<ilm-searchable-snapshot,{search-snaps}>> on the cold tier. These fully mounted
indices eliminate the need for replicas, reducing required disk space by
approximately 50% compared to the regular indices.
* <<frozen-tier,Frozen tier>> nodes hold time series data that is accessed 
rarely and never updated. The frozen tier stores <<partially-mounted,partially
mounted indices>> of <<ilm-searchable-snapshot,{search-snaps}>> exclusively.
This extends the storage capacity even further — by up to 20 times compared to
the warm tier. 

Content data will remain on the <<content-tier,content tier>> for its entire 
data lifecycle. You can configure your time series data to progress through the 
descending temperature data tiers hot, warm, cold, and frozen according to your 
performance, resiliency, and data retention requirements. Elastic recommends 
automating these lifecycle transitions via <<index-lifecycle-management,{ilm}>>, 

> specifically also using <<data-streams,Data Streams>>. 

Author: > are we just suggesting the data stream lifecycle, with generic ilm as a fallback?

Agreed on this.

[TIP]
====
A data tiers' performance is highly subjective to its backing hardware profile. 
See {cloud}/ec-configure-deployment-settings.html#ec-hardware-profiles[{ecloud}'s 

> hardware profiles] for example {cloud}/ec-reference-hardware.html[hardware configurations].

Author: your edits are golden, but this especially is a beautiful simplification, cheers!

{es} itself does not require but Elastic generally assumes, for example in {ecloud} 
Deployment configurations, that descending temperature data tiers have an increasing 
multiplier of cpu and/or heap resources to their data storage ratio, so that later data 

> tiers can gain more space for data storage at the cost of slower response times.

Author: I agree I agonized about this sentence for quite a bit and while I think this says what I meant and think it says, I don't like it as a sentence so any concise rewording would work for me. That is why I immediately left an implication example right after. 

FWIW in its current state it reads: `cpu | heap ~= X * data` so an increasing multiplier means `X` gets bigger so the proportion of cpu/heap resources gets smaller to disk as `X` gets bigger aka. after hot has less proportional cpu/heap to disk than hot.

> {es} itself does not require but Elastic generally assumes, for example in {ecloud} 
> Deployment configurations, that descending temperature data tiers have an increasing 
> multiplier of cpu and/or heap resources to their data storage ratio, so that later data 
> tiers can gain more space for data storage at the cost of slower response times.

Reviewer 2: ok. I think maybe I'm stuck on the flow of the math in the sentence...

maybe this (prob not accurate enough)? 

```suggestion
Elastic generally assumes that lower temperature data tiers have an increased ratio of data storage to CPU or heap resources. This allows later tiers to gain more space for data storage at the cost of slower response times.
```

or, more precise if we care about the multiplier/factor:

```suggestion
Elastic generally assumes that, for each descending temperature data tier, the ratio of data storage to CPU or heap resources increases by a factor of 1. This allows later tiers to gain more space for data storage at the cost of slower response times.
```

we could consider just throwing the math in there. imo this is still pretty hard to extract a "follow this calculation" from, so if that's your goal we might want to just give them a formula.

> Under this assumption for a general architecture baseline, the above outline of 
> descending temperature data tier access proportionalities would reflect as searches 
> hitting 85% hot, 10% warm, 5% cold, and 1% frozen and ingest targeting 
> 95% hot, 4% warm, 1% cold, and 0% frozen as checked via 
> <<cat-thread-pool,CAT Threadpools>>. These proportions are not required by {es} 
> although they encourage stable and highly responsive clusters. They're only intended 
> to serve as a general architecture baseline to then be applied to your specific 
> use case, hardware profiles, and architecture per Elastic's 
> https://www.elastic.co/blog/it-depends[It Depends] philosphy.  

Reviewer 2: hmm, how about ....

you can briefly expand on "might be impacted" if you want to make it scarier - "and cause outages" "and result in unintended behavior" or something.

```suggestion
Using the principle that lower-temperature tiers should hold less frequently updated and accessed data, your requests should be distributed to data tiers in the following approximate proportions. These proportions keep your clusters stable and highly responsive.
	
	- Search: 85% hot, 10% warm, 5% cold, and 1% frozen
	- Ingest: 95% hot, 4% warm, 1% cold, and 0% frozen
	
	You can check how your access requests are distributed among your data tiers using the <<cat-thread-pool,CAT thread pools>> API.  If your lower temperature tiers are being accessed at higher proportions, then your cluster performance might be impacted. 
	
	These proportions are intended to serve as a general baseline that you can apply to your specific 
	use case, hardware profiles, and architecture.
```

data lifecycle. 

- Time series data should progress through the 
descending temperature data tiers (hot, warm, cold, and frozen) according to your 
performance, resiliency, and data retention requirements. 
+ 
You can automate these lifecycle transitions using the <<data-streams,data stream lifecycle>>, or custom <<index-lifecycle-management,{ilm}>>. 

[TIP]
====
A data tier's performance depends on its backing hardware profile. 
For example hardware profiles, refer to Elastic Cloud's {cloud}/ec-reference-hardware.html[instance configurations].

Elastic generally assumes that lower temperature data tiers have an increased ratio of data storage to CPU or heap resources. This allows later tiers to gain more space for data storage at the cost of slower response times.

Using the principle that lower-temperature tiers should hold less frequently updated and accessed data, your requests should be distributed to data tiers in the following approximate proportions. These proportions keep your clusters stable and highly responsive.
	
	- Search: 85% hot, 10% warm, 5% cold, and 1% frozen
	- Ingest: 95% hot, 4% warm, 1% cold, and 0% frozen

> 	

Author: 👋🏽 @dakrone will you kindly review these proportional percentages per data tier for Dev sign-off? I believe the rest of this PR consolidates content from existing doc pages for clarity, but this call out uniquely makes a new claim.

Reviewer: Where did we get these numbers? I don't think we can make generalizations for these kinds of percentages, for example, it's perfectly valid to have a "search" load that's `hot` and `frozen`, where the searches hit each tier 50% of the time (again, the performance requirements aren't something we can supply, they have to come from the user).

On the ingestion side, I wouldn't expect any indexing at all on the warm and cold tiers, how did we arrive at the 4% and 1% numbers respectively?

Author: > Where did we get these numbers?

In PR description I highlighted that I guesstimated/made-up these numbers. Please only consider them placeholders.

> for example, it's perfectly valid to have a "search" load that's hot and frozen, where the searches hit each tier 50% of the time (again, the performance requirements aren't something we can supply, they have to come from the user).

From Support, I may only deal with the situations where searches 50% hitting frozen breaks the cluster. The age-old example is Frozen tier having future dates takes down the entire cluster. I do want to highlight though that the [existing doc](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/master/data-tiers.html#frozen-tier) does already say "Frozen tier nodes hold time series data that is accessed rarely and never updated.". I may be missing the intended interpretation, but "accessed rarely" does not sound like 50% to me but a lot more like the 1% I guesstimated. 

> On the ingestion side, I wouldn't expect any indexing at all on the warm and cold tiers, how did we arrive at the 4% and 1% numbers respectively?

Again guesstimated from the existing doc saying " Warm tier nodes hold time series data that is accessed less-frequently and **rarely needs to be updated.**  ... Cold tier nodes hold time series data that is accessed infrequently and **not normally updated.**". I don't know what these numbers should be which is why I requested your feedback 🙂 . 

I'm on board if in general we're concerned about explicit percentages, but at least from what I see users feel unguided and don't realize for desiring performance that they haven't architected in a way that'd get themselves there. That's the need I'm hoping to fill in better, but I'm not tied on how we do that. So if wording needs to change or we need to have an "it depends" blog instead and just link to it from here, all that's fine by me. But I would like to advocate for something more concrete to point users to for base level architecture / expectation setting.

Author: > (@dakrone) I also have concerns that we give a false sense of specificity with giving hard recommendations for percentages in these docs. My preference would be to teach the reader to weigh the values of cost, performance, and configuration complexity rather than giving hard numbers that are likely to mislead a user. I'm curious what your thoughts about this are.

I have a strong preference for this as well instead of my attempted baseline percentages which from May10 I had derived/made-up from existing commentary on the page. From Support's side, I notice users feel the ambiguity and this was my attempt to reduce it but to your point, I don't think Support can advise the more complex discussion without further backing Dev docs/blogs. 

Would this be a better takeaway discussion? I'm don't want to try to solve all the problems in this one doc PR vs would be happy with at least merging the more discernible TOC to help the page read/search/skim better.

Reviewer: Yeah, I think we could remove it from this PR and make it a separate discussion.

> 	You can check how your access requests are distributed among your data tiers using the <<cat-thread-pool,CAT thread pools>> API.  If your lower temperature tiers are being accessed at higher proportions, then your cluster performance might be impacted. 

Reviewer: I think looking through the cat threadpool API is a big request for an end user. It would be fairly easy to misunderstand, and since it's non-persistent it may give a very skewed view of a workload.

Author: That's fair! I'm curious what alternative investigation you'd recommend since it's a current user need? 

(I again may be ignorant of better ways. For the limited view I have: IME there's only hodge-podge answers like this outlined API currently but that would be a design improvement takeaway but not stop us from telling users the best they can introspect right now. A possible alternative would might be enabling Monitoring and then comparing node ingest rates; would that be better?)

Reviewer: > A possible alternative would might be enabling Monitoring and then comparing node ingest rates; would that be better?

Doing it through monitoring would be better (not just ingest rates but also node load). We can think of threadpools as more of an "implementation detail" of the load/throughput rather than something we want them to rely upon.

	
	These proportions are intended to serve as a general baseline that you can apply to your specific 

> 	use case, hardware profiles, and architecture.

Reviewer: How would these actually be applied? You mention above "your requests should be distributed to data tiers in the following approximate proportions", but that's not something prescriptive a user can actually do.

We don't want them to try and route queries to different tiers based on ratios, but rather to size things accordingly. Again, I'm worried that we simplify the problem here, it's not only a performance trade-off but also one of cost (for which this does not account).

Author: This is fair 🤔. 

I did not list (my miss) but expected the answer to line up to Support's (A) hold data in higher tiers longer probably by updating an ILM policy, (B) where possible filter searches by time range to avoid load on lower tiers, or (C) review performance vs billing needs via the currently listed "apply to your specific use case, hardware profiles, and architecture". +(D) we recommend Searchable Snapshots to reduce billing while extending data retention.

Content data:

* <<content-tier,Content tier>> nodes handle the indexing and query load for content 
indices, such as a <<system-indices,system index>> or a product catalog.

Time series data:

* <<hot-tier,Hot tier>> nodes handle the indexing load for time series data, 
such as logs or metrics. They hold your most recent, most-frequently-accessed data.
* <<warm-tier,Warm tier>> nodes hold time series data that is accessed less-frequently
and rarely needs to be updated.
* <<cold-tier,Cold tier>> nodes hold time series data that is accessed
infrequently and not normally updated. To save space, you can keep
<<fully-mounted,fully mounted indices>> of
<<ilm-searchable-snapshot,{search-snaps}>> on the cold tier. These fully mounted
indices eliminate the need for replicas, reducing required disk space by
approximately 50% compared to the regular indices.
* <<frozen-tier,Frozen tier>> nodes hold time series data that is accessed 
rarely and never updated. The frozen tier stores <<partially-mounted,partially
mounted indices>> of <<ilm-searchable-snapshot,{search-snaps}>> exclusively.
This extends the storage capacity even further — by up to 20 times compared to
the warm tier. 

> IMPORTANT: {es} generally expects nodes within a data tier to share the same
> hardware profile. Variations that don't follow this recommendation should be
> carefully architected to avoid <<hotspotting,hot spotting>>.

Reviewer 2: suggest we kill this little para to avoid repetition since we included it in the intro

```suggestion
```

[[data-tier-allocation]]
=== Data tier index allocation

> You can check an existing index's data tier by <<indices-get-settings,polling its 
> settings>> for <<tier-preference-allocation-filter,`index.routing.allocation.include._tier_preference`>>:
> 
> [source,console]
> --------------------------------------------------
> GET /my-index-000001/_settings?filter_path=*.settings.index.routing.allocation.include._tier_preference
> --------------------------------------------------
> 
> This `_tier_preference` setting may include a descending preference list for later data tier 
> temperatures, for example <<cold-tier,cold tier>> would state `data_cold,data_warm,data_hot`. 
> See <<ilm-migrate,ILM Migrate>> for more context. 
> 
> {es} will attempt to <<index-modules-allocation,allocate>> the index's shards 
> according to this setting. This setting will not overpower and may conflict with 
> other allocation settings preventing the shard from allocating. This historically 
> has occurred when a cluster has not yet been or has been insufficiently <<troubleshoot-migrate-to-tiers,migrated 
> to data tiers>>. This setting will not unallocate a currently allocated shard, but 
> may for example prevent it from migrating from its current location to its designated 
> data tier. To troubleshoot, run <<cluster-allocation-explain,Allocation Explain>> 
> against the suspected problematic shard.
> 
> A created index will default the `_tier_preference` setting to `data_content` which 
> will allocate the index' shards to the content tier. A <<data-streams,Data Stream>> 
> will override its backing created index to `data_hot` to instead default allocate to the 
> hot tier. You can override these default actions upon index creation by explicitly setting 
> the preferred value either via an <<index-templates,Index Template>>, see 
> <<getting-started-index-lifecycle-management,bootstrapping ILM>>, or from within the 
> <<indices-create-index,created index>> request body itself. You may also override this 
> setting at any time by <<indices-update-settings,updating index settings>> to the preferred 
> value. 
> 
> You may set the `_tier_preference` value to `null` to remove the data tier preference 
> setting which will allow it to allocate to any data node within the cluster and will not 
> reset the index's setting back to its respective upon-creation default. Forewarning if you 
> do that an <<ilm-migrate,ILM Migrate>> may apply a value at a later point if the index is managed. 

Reviewer 2: overall, I think this section could be chunked a little more and reordered so the "core" stuff comes first, and the edge stuff (e.g. errors caused by a bad migration to data tiers) comes second / doesn't need to be read unless people are having problems :)

careful with your link labeling - use the name that's available on the target page when referring to an entire page.

went a little ham with suggested updates - it's all style + clarity stuff and I might have injected some untruths so please bear with me.

```suggestion
The <<tier-preference-allocation-filter, `index.routing.allocation.include._tier_preference`>> setting determines the tier index shards should be allocated to.

When you create an index, by default {es} sets the `_tier_preference`
to `data_content` to automatically allocate the index shards to the content tier.

When {es} creates an index as part of a <<data-streams, data stream>>,
by default {es} sets the `_tier_preference`
to `data_hot` to automatically allocate the index shards to the hot tier.

At the time of index creation, you can override the default setting by explicitly setting 
the preferred value in one of two ways:

- By using an <<index-templates,index template>>. Refer to <<getting-started-index-lifecycle-management,Automate rollover with ILM>> for details.
- From within the <<indices-create-index,create index>> request body. 

You can override this 
setting after index creation by <<indices-update-settings,updating the index setting>> to the preferred 
value. 

In this setting, you can provide multiple tiers in order of preference to prevent indices from remaining unallocated if no nodes are available in the preferred tier.

To remove the data tier preference 
setting, set the `_tier_preference` value to `null`. This allows the index to allocate to any data node within the cluster. Setting the `_tier_preference` to `null` does not restore the default value. Note that, in the case of managed indices, a <<ilm-migrate,migrate>> action might apply a new value in its place. 

[discrete]
[[data-tier-allocation-value]]
==== Determine the current data tier preference

You can check an existing index's data tier preference by <<indices-get-settings,polling its 
settings>> for `index.routing.allocation.include._tier_preference`:

[source,console]
--------------------------------------------------
GET /my-index-000001/_settings?filter_path=*.settings.index.routing.allocation.include._tier_preference
--------------------------------------------------

[discrete]
[[data-tier-allocation-troubleshooting]]
==== Troubleshooting

The `_tier_preference` setting might conflict with other allocation settings. This conflict might prevent the shard from allocating. A conflict might occur when a cluster has not yet been completely <<troubleshoot-migrate-to-tiers,migrated 
to data tiers>>. 

This setting will not unallocate a currently allocated shard, but might prevent it from migrating from its current location to its designated data tier. To troubleshoot, call the <<cluster-allocation-explain,cluster allocation explain API>> and specify the suspected problematic shard.
```

[[data-tier-allocation]]
=== Data tier index allocation

The <<tier-preference-allocation-filter, `index.routing.allocation.include._tier_preference`>> setting determines the tier index shards should be allocated to.

> When you create an index, by default {es} sets the `_tier_preference`

Author: @shainaraskas it might just be pedantic-ness catching me, but I feel we might be leaving a read-through logic gap that a "created index" could simultaneously be a data stream's backing index which'd behave differently. So this paragraph cannot be separated from the paragraph after because Elasticsearch's default `_tier_preference` is a two-step logic flow. 

Overall I don't otherwise have a problem with how this was previously written, but this is why I had collapsed the content. I don't feel strongly on what the phrasing is but (again maybe only pedantic and we can just ignore me but) I believe this should be a single paragraph.

Reviewer 2: would saying "that isn't part of a data stream" help? the reason I'm chunking it a little is because if people are only looking for the second piece of info, it's not easy to scan to it.

Author: I'm going to side with this point being me feeling pedantic. I don't like it both/either way so no reason for it holding the conversation up 😂

Reviewer 2: we can always pivot later if people are still having issues 👍

to `data_content` to automatically allocate the index shards to the content tier.

When {es} creates an index as part of a <<data-streams, data stream>>,
by default {es} sets the `_tier_preference`
to `data_hot` to automatically allocate the index shards to the hot tier.

At the time of index creation, you can override the default setting by explicitly setting 
the preferred value in one of two ways:

- By using an <<index-templates,index template>>. Refer to <<getting-started-index-lifecycle-management,Automate rollover with ILM>> for details.
- From within the <<indices-create-index,create index>> request body. 

You can override this 
setting after index creation by <<indices-update-settings,updating the index setting>> to the preferred 
value. 

> In this setting, you can provide multiple tiers in order of preference to prevent indices from remaining unallocated if no nodes are available in the preferred tier.

Author: @shainaraskas could we consider leaving the example ... ? This was intended to answer a common Support question that users believe ILM was manually overrode or applied incorrectly because it didn't _just_ say `_tier_preference: data_cold`. This attempted to highlight the system does and the user can set a descending preference list. 

```
<<cold-tier,cold tier>> would state `data_cold,data_warm,data_hot`
```

Reviewer 2: is that a default value when the cold tier is created, or is it just an example of a value you could set? if the latter, try:

```suggestion
In this setting, you can provide multiple tiers in order of preference to prevent indices from remaining unallocated if no nodes are available in the preferred tier. For example, you might set your `<<cold-tier,cold tier>>`'s `_tier_preference` to `data_cold,data_warm,data_hot`.
```

if the former,

```suggestion
In this setting, you can provide multiple tiers in order of preference to prevent indices from remaining unallocated if no nodes are available in the preferred tier. For example, <<cold-tier,cold tier>>`'s `_tier_preference` is set to `data_cold,data_warm,data_hot` by default.
```

Author: We're ballpark, thanks for sticking through this nuance with me. When ILM automatically migrates your data to cold it sets `data_cold,data_warm,data_hot`. But that's not when the cold tier is created vs when ILM moves the index to the cold tier. If that makes sense? I would think your former with the appendage "like ILM Migrate does for the cold phase" or something 🤔.

Reviewer 2: like this? 

```suggestion
This setting also accepts multiple tiers in order of preference. This prevents indices from remaining unallocated if no nodes are available in the preferred tier. For example, when {ilm} migrates an index to the cold phase, it sets the index `_tier_preference` to `data_cold,data_warm,data_hot`.
```

Author: That's excellent, cheers!

[[data-tier-allocation]]
=== Data tier index allocation

> The <<tier-preference-allocation-filter, `index.routing.allocation.include._tier_preference`>> setting determines the tier index shards should be allocated to.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The <<tier-preference-allocation-filter, `index.routing.allocation.include._tier_preference`>> setting determines which tier the index should be allocated to.
```

We should stay at the "index" level for abstractions here, shards is too low-level.

When you create an index, by default {es} sets the `_tier_preference`
to `data_content` to automatically allocate the index shards to the content tier.

When {es} creates an index as part of a <<data-streams, data stream>>,
by default {es} sets the `_tier_preference`
to `data_hot` to automatically allocate the index shards to the hot tier.

At the time of index creation, you can override the default setting by explicitly setting 
the preferred value in one of two ways:

> - By using an <<index-templates,index template>>. Refer to <<getting-started-index-lifecycle-management,Automate rollover with ILM>> for details.
> - From within the <<indices-create-index,create index>> request body. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Using an <<index-templates,index template>>. Refer to <<getting-started-index-lifecycle-management,Automate rollover with ILM>> for details.
- Within the <<indices-create-index,create index>> request body. 
```

- From within the <<indices-create-index,create index>> request body. 

You can override this 
setting after index creation by <<indices-update-settings,updating the index setting>> to the preferred 
value. 

In this setting, you can provide multiple tiers in order of preference to prevent indices from remaining unallocated if no nodes are available in the preferred tier.

To remove the data tier preference 
setting, set the `_tier_preference` value to `null`. This allows the index to allocate to any data node within the cluster. Setting the `_tier_preference` to `null` does not restore the default value. Note that, in the case of managed indices, a <<ilm-migrate,migrate>> action might apply a new value in its place. 

[discrete]
[[data-tier-allocation-value]]
==== Determine the current data tier preference

You can check an existing index's data tier preference by <<indices-get-settings,polling its 
settings>> for `index.routing.allocation.include._tier_preference`:

[source,console]
--------------------------------------------------
GET /my-index-000001/_settings?filter_path=*.settings.index.routing.allocation.include._tier_preference

> --------------------------------------------------

Reviewer 2: this should get the tests passing
```suggestion
--------------------------------------------------
// TEST[setup:my_index]
```
